So welcome to Fullstack Authentication.
My name is Maximiliano Firtman,
F-I-R-T on Twitter, firt.dev, my website.
And we're going to spend the whole
day doing a fullstack project.
So we're going to see how to
do authentication these days.
So we're going to start from scratch,
creating a classic login form and
see how we can do it better.
And then we're going to end
up working with passwordless
authentication with Face ID, Touch ID.
We're going to see how
that works on the web.
So I'm a mobile web developer.
I've been doing web development for
a while.
I'm from Argentina, by the way.
So I've been doing JavaScript and
progressive web apps for a while now.
So HTML since 1996, so long time ago.
The same as JavaScript and
web apps in general, and
also I've been a back end developer
in the days of classic ASP.
Even before that, Pearl, not sure if
anyone remembers that, but also PHP,
.NET, Java, Python, and
everything that you can count there.
I authored 13 books,
typically on web, mobile,
web performance, and
more than 150 web apps in general.
So I've been implementing login
mechanism for a while as well.
So let's start and jump directly
into our topic, authentication.
So today we will cover these ideas.
First, what authentication is?
But actually, why it's important,
I think that most of us understand the
basics of why authentication is important.
We wanna identify users and
we wanna make sure that is the user and
not someone impersonating the user.
From that basic idea to other things like,
what's the difference between
authentication and authorization?
That is not actually the same thing.
So we're going to talk about
the state of techniques.
So where we are right now in
terms of the evolution of
how we want to authenticate
users on the web.
We're going to start with login forms,
because they're still there.
So we will cover the basics in case you
are starting with the web, maybe you
are a recent full stack developer and
you wanna implement your own login system.
Well, we're going to start with
the basics of the forms, but we're going
to see also new authentication flows that
are part of today's design guidelines.
And on that side, we're going to
talk about the data structure.
So how you should structure your database,
for example, or object-based databases,
it doesn't matter.
So we're going to see how
that structure looks like.
Then we're going to also create some APIs.
So the endpoints, server side, the
RESTful APIs to actually make that work.
In terms of APIs, we're going to
see credential management API,
web authentication,
also known as WebAuthn, and
we're going to talk about passkeys and
passlinks.
So we're going to talk about
those new ideas that are,
let's say coming, but
they are kind of there, okay?
So we will get there with time.
So pre-requisites.
So I'm going to write JavaScript, HTML.
So if you know HTML and
JavaScript, you're good.
I'm going to use Node.js for the backend.
So having some experience
in Node.js helps.
If you don't have experience with Node.js,
It's okay.
You will understand the JavaScript
code anyway, it's not is a big deal.
And at firtman.github.io/authentication,
you have a step on step guideline of
everything that we're going to do today,
including the links for these slides,
in case you wanna follow along,
and also the link for
the repo that we will use later.
So I will give you that link again later,
if not, it's in the instructions, okay?
So, that repo, we're not going
to start 100% from scratch.
So I already have the HTML, the CSS,
so we don't spend time on that and
we spend time on the important part for
us, that is authentication